There are lots of problems in Berlin,
the population is growing,
people are losing their flats
or can no longer live where they want,
small businesses are losing their traditional location.
The media talk a lot about these problems,
but there are few proposals for a solution.
The solutions I see are only ever piecemeal:
Building on an allotment garden here,
putting up a new skyskraper there.
But I’m not seeing an overall concept.
We have to develop a vision for Berlin
of what we want the city to look like in 50 or 100 years.
I don’t even know of any vision for the city in 5 to 10 years.
And that bothers us.
Should land even be in private ownership?
And if all real estate is owned by 10% of the people,
what about the other 90%?
Do they just live there as guests?
Under what conditions?
Looking at it like that,
you can see that the issue is hugely problematic.
There is someone who can decide,
who can charge rent or terminate a lease.
It’s a fundamental question that is never asked.
A pilot project on Tempelhof Field could change that.
It could be in the form of a lease agreement that runs for 99 years.
I think that would be enough to attract an investor
to build a house here subject to certain conditions.
This model would remove the increase in land value
which we have seen for the last 1000 years.
Rents would be indexed to the cost of living.
This is a really important point.
It means if I move here and retire in 10 years,
I know that I'll still be able to afford my flat
because pensions are indexed as well.
The basic idea is to create a ground floor of 6 by 20 metres for all houses
which could be used as a multifunctional room.
It could be a space for various associations,
for all kinds of projects.
The houses would be on the edge of the field
so as not to ruin the fantastic free space,
the vastness that we have here,
but to enfold and enrich it.
I only know city centres that are becoming emptier
because of expense office rents,
because of people who live partly in New York, partly in Shanghai,
who have so much money that they can afford huge apartments
where they might spend six weeks a year.
But they don’t fill the city as inhabitants with social obligations and social needs.
They don’t take part.
What do you make of the referendum result
against building on the field?
We have the great freedom to be able to rethink things at any time.
If we make the same decision again,
that’s totally fine,
but if we make a different decision,
that’s ok as well.
I want to be for something rather than against something,
I want to think positively and have a vision.
And everybody can take part in that.
In Berlin everybody is so used to fighting for their idea,
for environmentalism or economic liberalism,
instead of doing something that is both
and from which both sides can benefit
because there isn’t just one single viewpoint.